OSDOCS-19969: Gateway API backendTLSPolicy for securing HTTPRoutes (#112677)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/understanding-backend-tls-validation.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/ingress_load_balancing/configuring_ingress_cluster_traffic/routing-http-requests-to-services.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: CONCEPT
[id="nw-gateway-api-understanding-backendtlspolicy_{context}"]
= Understanding backend TLS validation

[role="_abstract"]
To ensure secure end-to-end encryption, you must understand how `BackendTLSPolicy` validates your backend certificates. This validation ensures your gateway securely connects to the correct destination pod.

> 

Reviewer: In the section on `targetRefs`, we should explicitly warn that `sectionName` (the port name) is **mandatory** if a Service has multiple ports and you want to apply different policies to them. If omitted when multiple references target the same Service, the policy will fail validation or result in a `Conflicted` status.

Author: Thanks, I've added this information to the module

`BackendTLSPolicy` does two things: it describes one or more (up to 16) targets of the policy (`targetRefs`), and how the backend certificate should be validated (`validation`).

For validation, `BackendTLSPolicy` specifies two options the certificates may use to connect via TLS:

`caCertificateRefs`:: 

> Use this option for explicit CA certificates. These refer to one or more (up to 8) PEM-encoded TLS certificates configured within a config map.

Reviewer: Verify if `caCertificateRefs` supports cross-namespace references via `ReferenceGrant`. In most current implementations, the `ConfigMap` containing the CA bundle must reside in the same namespace as the `BackendTLSPolicy`. If cross-namespace is supported, we should provide an example similar to the cross-namespace `Secret` example used for edge listeners.

Author: Thanks, I've added the namespace limitation to the definition

Reviewer 2: As far as I know, it is not supported. That's why it's not listed.

`wellKnownCACertificates`:: 
Use this option for trusted system certificates.

Validation also specifies `hostname` (Server Name Indication (SNI)) that must match the certificate served by the destination pod, unless `subjectAltNames` (Subject Alternative Name (SAN)) is also specified. Up to 5 `subjectAltNames` may be specified. The choice of whether to use `hostname` or `subjectAltNames` depends on the certificate served by the backend pods that are targeted.

If the pod’s certificate uses SANs, the `BackendTLSPolicy` must have at least one matching `subjectAltName` in order to successfully connect using TLS. `subjectAltNames` must have a type (`hostname` or Uniform Resource Identifier (`URI`)) and may be specified as domain names, URIs, or a combination of both.

> [NOTE]

Reviewer: This note about `hostname` and `subjectAltNames` is vital. From an implementation perspective (Istio/Sail), adding any entry to `subjectAltNames` typically disables the default behavior of using the `hostname` (SNI) for certificate verification. Advanced users must ensure that if they need both, the SNI hostname is explicitly duplicated in the `subjectAltNames` list.

Author: Excellent, I've updated the Note accordingly

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/ingress_load_balancing/configuring_ingress_cluster_traffic/securing-httproutes.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: CONCEPT
[id="understanding-backendtlspolicy_{context}"]
= Understanding backend TLS validation

[role="_abstract"]

> To ensure secure end-to-end encryption, you can use a BackendTLSPolicy to validate your backend certificates. This validation ensures your gateway securely connects to the correct destination pod.

Reviewer 2: This was omitted, and I think the note belongs here.
```suggestion
To use re-encrypt termination in Gateway API, you need to combine listener edge termination with a backendTLSPolicy attached to the service.

[NOTE]
====
Unlike {product-title} routes, re-encrypt for `HTTPRoutes` requires a listener configured with edge termination on the gateway and a `BackendTLSPolicy` that targets the service.
====
```

Author: Great catch! Got lost in modularization. I put it back in.

`BackendTLSPolicy` describes one or more (up to 16) targets of the policy (`targetRefs`) and how the backend certificate should be validated (`validation`).

[IMPORTANT]
====
If your target service has multiple ports and you want to apply different policies to them, you must explicitly specify the `sectionName` (the port name) in your `targetRefs`. If you omit the `sectionName` when multiple references target the same service, the policy will fail validation or result in a `Conflicted` status.

> ====

Reviewer 2: This does not belong here.  If we add this, it should be under a new example that has a target service with multiple ports.

Author: Agreed, moving this

> For validation, `BackendTLSPolicy` specifies two options the certificates may use to connect via TLS:

Reviewer 2: This refers to one or more certificates, so we should use suffix (s) or /s.
```suggestion
For validation, `BackendTLSPolicy` specifies two options the certificate(s) may use to connect via TLS.  Only one may be used, both cannot be used.
```

Author: Thanks, I incorporated your suggestion with a few grammatical tweaks to meet our doc guidelines.

`caCertificateRefs`:: 

> Use this option for explicit CA certificates. These refer to one or more (up to 8) PEM-encoded TLS certificates configured within a config map. Because this field uses a local object reference, the config map must reside in the same namespace as the `BackendTLSPolicy`. Cross-namespace references via a `ReferenceGrant` are not supported.

Reviewer 2: If you spell it out instead of using the object name configMap, it should be configuration map.  I think it is TMI about the lack of reference grant support, and I've never tried it, but if you want to keep it, please adjust as below.
```suggestion
Use this option for explicit CA certificates. These refer to one or more (up to 8) PEM-encoded TLS certificates configured within a configuration map. The configuration map must reside in the same namespace as the `BackendTLSPolicy`. Cross-namespace references via a `ReferenceGrant` are not supported.
```

Author: Got it, thanks!

`wellKnownCACertificates`:: 
Use this option for trusted system certificates.

Validation also specifies `hostname` (Server Name Indication (SNI)) that must match the certificate served by the destination pod, unless `subjectAltNames` (Subject Alternative Name (SAN)) is also specified. Up to 5 `subjectAltNames` may be specified. The choice of whether to use `hostname` or `subjectAltNames` depends on the certificate served by the backend pods that are targeted.

> If the pod’s certificate uses SANs, the `BackendTLSPolicy` must have at least one matching `subjectAltName` in order to successfully connect using TLS. `subjectAltNames` must have a type (`hostname` or Uniform Resource Identifier (`URI`)) and may be specified as domain names, URIs, or a combination of both.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Validation also specifies `hostname` (Server Name Indication (SNI)) that must match the certificate served by the destination pod, unless `subjectAltNames` (Subject Alternative Name (SAN)) is also specified. Up to 5 `subjectAltNames` may be specified. 

The choice of whether to use `hostname` or `subjectAltNames` depends on the certificate served by the backend pods that are targeted.  If the pod’s certificate uses SANs, the `BackendTLSPolicy` must have at least one matching `subjectAltName` in order to successfully connect using TLS. `SubjectAltNames` must have a type (hostname or Uniform Resource Identifier (`URI`)) and may be specified as domain names, URIs, or a combination of both.
```

Author: Good call! I implemented this change with some tweaks to comply with doc guidelines.

[NOTE]
====

> Adding an entry to the `subjectAltNames` list disables the default behavior of using the `hostname` (SNI) for certificate verification. If your configuration requires both, you must explicitly duplicate the SNI hostname in the `subjectAltNames` list.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Gateway API implementations don't automatically use the hostname as a subject alternative name unless it is explicitly listed within the subject alternative names.  If your certificate requires the hostname to be considered as a subjectAltName, then add it to the `subjectAltNames` list.  
```

Author: Thanks, updated
